=== Spanish: 25/25 ===
odyssey-book-00-preface.md
odyssey-book-01.md
odyssey-book-02.md
odyssey-book-03.md
odyssey-book-04.md
odyssey-book-05.md
odyssey-book-06.md
odyssey-book-07.md
odyssey-book-08.md
odyssey-book-09.md
odyssey-book-10.md
odyssey-book-11.md
odyssey-book-12.md
odyssey-book-13.md
odyssey-book-14.md
odyssey-book-15.md
odyssey-book-16.md
odyssey-book-17.md
odyssey-book-18.md
odyssey-book-19.md
odyssey-book-20.md
odyssey-book-21.md
odyssey-book-22.md
odyssey-book-23.md
odyssey-book-24.md

=== Validation ===
B00-preface              8/  8          0/  0               3/  3             0/  0             ✓ 
B01                    112/112         10/ 10               5/  5             9/  9             ✓ 
B02                    118/118          5/  5               5/  5            11/ 11             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "The first to speak was an old, old man named Aegyptius, bent double with age and...", Untranslated paragraph: "I am obliged to tell you what had become of him, because the poem's first audien...", Untranslated paragraph: "The old man leaned on his staff and said: "Listen to me, men of Ithaca. We have ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Telemachus was very glad to hear that, and did not sit still long. He stood up i...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Sir, he is not far off — you are about to see him, and yes, I am the one who ca...", Untranslated paragraph: ""The first is that I have lost my father — who was once *your* king, and a gentl...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I tell you I would defend myself if I had the strength. This has gone beyond be...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And here is the trick she pulled. She set up a great loom in the hall, and star...", Untranslated paragraph: ""That is what she said, and we agreed, because how could we not? So she wove at ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Now here is our answer to you, and you may hear it, and so may all the Greeks. ...", Untranslated paragraph: "For three years — three years — a woman with no legal power, no army, no husband...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I want you to hold on to something else. This poem is about a man famous abo...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Antinous, I cannot possibly throw the mother who bore me and brought me up out ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""If your own hearts are troubled by this, then get out of my house. Feast somewh...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is the second time he has said that last sentence, and it is not a young ma...", Untranslated paragraph: "They came down off a mountain peak and flew a long while on the wind, wing to wi...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Listen to me, men of Ithaca, and let me speak chiefly to the suitors, because t...", Untranslated paragraph: ""So let us think, well ahead of time, how we may put a stop to this — or rather,...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I am a great deal better at reading this than you are. There are any number of ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And here is my advice to Telemachus, in front of everyone. Tell your mother to ...", Untranslated paragraph: "I want to be careful here, because it would be easy to say that the difference b...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Eurymachus — and the rest of you proud gentlemen — I am done pleading, and I wi...", Untranslated paragraph: ""If I hear my father is alive and on his way home, then for all my weariness I w...", Untranslated paragraph: "Mentor was an old friend of Odysseus's — the friend, in fact, to whom Odysseus h...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I do not particularly grudge the proud suitors doing violent things out of the ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And with that he dissolved the assembly, and they went off to their houses, and ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But if you were *not* his son, and Penelope's, then I would have no hope of you...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Never mind what the suitors are plotting. There is no sense in them, and no jus...", Untranslated paragraph: "He found the suitors in the courtyard, skinning goats and singeing pigs. And Ant...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Telemachus, you great orator, you unstoppable force — no more hard words and no...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Antinous, there is no way in the world I can have a quiet dinner with you peopl...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Who knows? He may go off in his hollow ship and die a long way from his friends...", Untranslated paragraph: "It was high-roofed and wide, and it held gold and bronze in heaps, and clothing ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Nurse, draw off some wine for me into jars — sweet wine, the best there is afte...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Dear child — how did *this* get into your head? Where are you going, an only so...", Untranslated paragraph: "So the old woman swore the great oath of the gods, and swore it properly; and th...", Untranslated paragraph: "She went through the town in the likeness of Telemachus, and stood beside each m...", Untranslated paragraph: "The sun went down and the streets grew dark. Then she ran the fast ship down int...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Athena thought of one thing more. She went to the house of Odysseus, and the...", Untranslated paragraph: "They came down to the sea and to the ship, and found the long-haired crew on the...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he led the way, and they came behind, and they carried it all down and stowe...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then Telemachus went aboard, and Athena went first and sat down in the stern, an...", Untranslated paragraph: "Telemachus called out to his men and told them to lay hold of the tackle, and th...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then they made the running-gear fast in the black swift ship, and set up mixing ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **Formulas.** In the 1930s a young American scholar named Milman Parry wen...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **The assembly.** Not a parliament; nobody voted, and nothing was carried ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **The shroud.** A body was washed, dressed, and wrapped in cloth before bu...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **Why sending Penelope home would ruin him.** Marriage in this world invol...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^5]: **The storeroom.** Notice what wealth *is* here: no coins, because coinage..."
B03                    108/108          5/  5               5/  5            13/ 13             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "The sun came up out of the beautiful water and into the brazen sky, to shine on ...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is not a figure of speech and I have not exaggerated it. They were sitting ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Here is the arrangement. When an animal was killed, the thigh bones were cut out...", Untranslated paragraph: "In this world you did not, as a rule, simply slaughter an animal and eat it. Kil...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the Greeks knew perfectly well that this was a strange sort of bargain, and ...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is one of the truest lines in the poem. He has spent two books discovering ...", Untranslated paragraph: "They came up to the crowd of Pylian men sitting in their companies, and there wa...", Untranslated paragraph: "The first to reach them was Nestor's son Peisistratus, who took them both by the...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Say your prayer to lord Poseidon, stranger, since you have come in on his feast...", Untranslated paragraph: "I hope somebody is enjoying this as much as I am. A well-brought-up young man ha...", Untranslated paragraph: "And she takes the cup. And she prays. She prays graciously and at length for glo...", Untranslated paragraph: "They ate; and when they had eaten as much as they wanted, old Nestor started the...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Now is the proper moment to enquire, now that our guests have had their dinner....", Untranslated paragraph: ""Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Greeks. You ask where we come from, a...", Untranslated paragraph: ""So I have come to your knees, in the hope that you will tell me how he died: wh...", Untranslated paragraph: "Nestor talks. He is the oldest of all the men who went to Troy; he has ruled thr...", Untranslated paragraph: "So. Nestor told him about the war. About how they suffered there, the unmanageab...", Untranslated paragraph: ""For nine years we worked at them with every trick we could invent, and the god ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But when we had sacked the steep city of Troy, and gone down to the ships, and ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""She set the two sons of Atreus quarrelling (Agamemnon and Menelaus). They calle...", Untranslated paragraph: ""We slept that night thinking bitter things about one another. In the morning ha...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Nestor, son of Neleus, great glory of the Greeks," said Telemachus, "yes — he t...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Well, my friend, since you bring it up," said Nestor, "they do say a great crow...", Untranslated paragraph: ""If grey-eyed Athena would only choose to look after you the way she looked afte...", Untranslated paragraph: "This is the third time in three books that we have been given this story (of Ore...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And there was a man with her — a singer, whom Agamemnon had left behind when he...", Untranslated paragraph: "Now recall a hall on Ithaca, three years running, with a singer in it who cannot...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Meanwhile," Nestor went on, "Menelaus and I sailed out of Troy together, as fri...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And all that time Aegisthus was king in Mycenae, planning ugly things, and the ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""So do not you wander far from home, my friend, and do not leave your property b...", Untranslated paragraph: "The sun went down and darkness came on, and Athena said that they should cut the...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Zeus and the other immortals forbid that you should go from *my* house to a fas...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You are quite right, sir," said Athena (still pretending to be Mentor), "and Te...", Untranslated paragraph: ""My friend, I do not think you will turn out a coward or a weakling, if the gods...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Be gracious to us, lady, and give a good name to me, and to my sons, and to my ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And they went up to the fine house and slept: Telemachus on a corded bedstead in...", Untranslated paragraph: "When Dawn came up, rosy-fingered, the old horseman (Nestor) was out of bed first...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Quickly now, my children. I want to satisfy Athena, who came to me openly, befo...", Untranslated paragraph: "And they all set to. The heifer came in from the field; the crew came up from th...", Untranslated paragraph: "And old Nestor gave out the gold, and the smith worked it and poured it round th...", Untranslated paragraph: "And old Nestor began the rite with the water and the scattered barley, and praye...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when they had prayed and thrown the barley, Thrasymedes, standing close, str...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when the dark blood had run out and the life had gone from the bones, they b...", Untranslated paragraph: "And meanwhile Telemachus was being bathed by Polycaste, Nestor's youngest daught...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then they roasted the outer meat and drew it off the spits and sat down and ate,...", Untranslated paragraph: "They did it quickly; and a housekeeper packed in bread and wine and the sort of ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the sun went down, and all the ways grew dark; and they came to Pherae, to t...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **Sacrifice, and the Prometheus bargain.** The story is told properly by H...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **Why Athena turned on her own side.** She had been the Greeks' most commi...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **Orestes and his mother.** Notice how little Nestor says. Aegisthus is ki...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^5]: **The bath.** A young unmarried daughter of the house personally bathing a..."
B04                    179/179          6/  6               5/  5            17/ 17             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "They (Telemachus and crew) came down into Sparta, into the hollow of the hills, ...", Untranslated paragraph: "The daughter he was sending away to the son of Achilles, who had been promised h...", Untranslated paragraph: "So they were feasting in the great high-roofed house, the neighbours and the fam...", Untranslated paragraph: "I want to point out, before anything else happens, that this enormous wedding is...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You were not a fool before this, Eteoneus. You are talking like a child. You an...", Untranslated paragraph: "So the man went, at a run, calling others to come with him; and they led the swe...", Untranslated paragraph: "There was a brightness like the sun and the moon through that high-roofed house ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I brought all this home in my ships after a great deal of suffering. Eight year...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I would rather live here with a third of it, and have the men back alive who di...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I cry for all of them. Often enough I sit here in the house and let my heart ou...", Untranslated paragraph: "Menelaus saw it, and knew, and hesitated — should he leave the boy to bring the ...", Untranslated paragraph: "She (Helen) came down like Artemis (god of the hunt) with her golden arrows, and...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Wife, I think so too, now you say it," said Menelaus. "Those are his feet and h...", Untranslated paragraph: "And then Nestor's son Peisistratus said: "Menelaus, you are right. He is that ma...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Well," said Menelaus, "if the son of a man I loved that much is in my house — a...", Untranslated paragraph: "Helen cried, and Telemachus cried, and Menelaus cried; and Nestor's son cried to...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Menelaus — my father (Nestor) always said, whenever we talked of you at home, t...", Untranslated paragraph: "She had thought of something, and she did it while they were talking, quietly, a...", Untranslated paragraph: "The daughter of Zeus had subtle drugs, and good ones, that Polydamna had given h...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I was the only one who knew him. And I questioned him, and he slipped away from...", Untranslated paragraph: ""The other Trojan women wailed and wailed. My own heart was glad — because by th...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Diomedes and I were sitting in the middle of it with Odysseus, and we heard you...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And every other Greek in there stayed quiet, except Anticlus, who wanted to ans...", Untranslated paragraph: "Helen's story: Odysseus came into Troy in disguise, and I alone recognised him, ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Menelaus's story: the Greeks were sitting inside the horse in the dark, minutes ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the second story is worse than it looks, because of the detail everybody ski...", Untranslated paragraph: "I do not think the poem knows. I think the poem is showing us something it under...", Untranslated paragraph: "Look again at the order of events. She has the drug in the bowl *before* the sto...", Untranslated paragraph: "They went to bed. Helen told the women to put out bedding in the porch, good pur...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Telemachus told him. The suitors. A hundred and eight of them in the house, ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Cowards. Weaklings. They want to lie down in the bed of a man with a heart like...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Father Zeus, and Athena, and Apollo — if he is still the man he was that day on...", Untranslated paragraph: "And here is the story he told, and it is the best story in the first quarter of ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""There is an island in the surf off Egypt — they call it Pharos — a day's clear ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And a goddess took pity on me. Eidothea, the daughter of Proteus, the mighty Ol...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And she said: *I will tell you exactly. There is a certain unerring Old Man of ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And she said: *At the exact hour the sun stands over the middle of the sky, the...", Untranslated paragraph: ""*And here is what the old man will do. He will count the seals over, going alon...", Untranslated paragraph: ""That was the most disgusting ambush ever laid. The stink of those sea-fed seals...", Untranslated paragraph: ""We waited all morning with our hearts steady, and the seals came up out of the ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""He turned into a lion with a great mane. And then a snake, and a leopard, and a...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And I said: *You know. Why put me off with questions? I have been stuck on this...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And he said: *You should have made the proper offerings to Zeus and the rest of...", Untranslated paragraph: ""It broke my heart to hear it. He was telling me to go back over the misty sea t...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And he said: *Son of Atreus, why ask me that? You would be better off not knowi...", Untranslated paragraph: "He was right, of course. And I will let Menelaus report the three answers as he ...", Untranslated paragraph: "**The first** was Ajax — not the great Ajax, but the other one, the son of Oileu...", Untranslated paragraph: "**The second** was Agamemnon. Proteus told it, and this is the fourth telling in...", Untranslated paragraph: "*It is not your fate to die in Argos (Greece). The immortals are going to send y...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Do not keep me long here," he said. "I could happily sit in this house a whole ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Menelaus laughed, and stroked his hand, and said his name, and said: "Good b...", Untranslated paragraph: "The suitors were in front of the great hall, amusing themselves throwing the dis...", Untranslated paragraph: "They were astonished. They had had no idea he had gone anywhere. They thought he...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Tell me the truth," said Antinous. "When did he go? And who went with him? Pick...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And the young men who went with him are the best in the country after us. And I...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the two of them were left with their hearts full of it. They made the rest o...", Untranslated paragraph: "Now Penelope was not long finding out what they were plotting, because Medon the...", Untranslated paragraph: "And her knees gave under her, and her heart, and she could not speak for a long ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And a grief that eats the heart came down over her, and she could not bring hers...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Listen to me," she said, sobbing. "Of all the women brought up in my generation...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You are hard women. Not one of you thought to get me out of my bed — and you kn...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Somebody call old Dolius to me — the servant my father gave me when I came here...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I knew. I gave him all of it, the bread and the sweet wine. And he made me swea...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Now wash, and put clean clothes on, and go upstairs with your women, and pray t...", Untranslated paragraph: "So she quieted her, and stopped her crying; and Penelope washed and put clean cl...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the suitors made a noise in the shadowy hall, and one of them said: "The que...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then Antinous told them to stop talking. And they took a fast ship down to the s...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Penelope lay upstairs without eating, without touching food or drink, turnin...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Sister — why have you come here? You never used to; you live so far away. And y...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Take heart," said the dim phantom, "and do not be too frightened. He has a comp...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Penelope said: "If you are a god, and you have heard a god's voice — then te...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **Megapenthes.** The poem gives you this in a single clause and moves on: ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **The drug.** The Greek names it *nepenthes* — literally "no-grief" — and ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **Did Helen go, or was she taken?** The single most argued-over question i...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **Ambrosia.** The food of the gods; the word means, roughly, "the not-mort...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^5]: **Elysium.** Almost everyone else in this poem is going to the same place ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^6]: **"No horses for Ithaca."** A small speech, easy to skip, doing three thin..."
B05                    170/170          5/  5               5/  5            15/ 15             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "And the gods sat down to a meeting, and Zeus who thunders on high sat among them...", Untranslated paragraph: "I do not think that is an accident, and I do not think it is the poem running sh...", Untranslated paragraph: ""My child. What a thing to let past your teeth. Did you not plan the whole of th...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Hermes — you are our messenger for these things. Go and tell the nymph with the...", Untranslated paragraph: "He bound the beautiful sandals under his feet, the immortal golden ones that car...", Untranslated paragraph: "He came down past Pieria and dropped out of the sky onto the sea, and went skimm...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when he reached the island, which was very far away, he stepped up out of th...", Untranslated paragraph: "There was a big fire burning on the hearth, and the smell of split cedar and jun...", Untranslated paragraph: "And round the cave the trees had grown up in a wood: alder, and black poplar, an...", Untranslated paragraph: "It is the most beautiful place in the entire book. There is nowhere else in twen...", Untranslated paragraph: "They knew each other on sight, gods always do. She sat him down in a shining cha...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Hermes of the golden wand. Why have you come here? You are honoured and welcome...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You are a goddess asking a god," said Hermes. "I will tell you straight. Zeus t...", Untranslated paragraph: ""He says you have a man here — the unluckiest of all the men who fought round th...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And when Demeter of the beautiful hair gave way to her feeling and lay with Ias...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And now you gods begrudge me a mortal man staying beside me. A man I saved. He ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But since there is no getting round the will of Zeus and no getting past it, le...", Untranslated paragraph: "She is quite right about the double standard, and the two examples she reaches f...", Untranslated paragraph: "She is also his jailer, and she is telling the story of it in a particular way. ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And she found him sitting on the shore. His eyes were never dry. The sweetness o...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Come — cut long timbers with the bronze and build yourself a broad raft, and fi...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You have something else in mind, goddess, and it is not sending me home. You ar...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Very well. Let the Earth know this, and the wide Sky above, and the water of th...", Untranslated paragraph: "And she turned and led the way, quickly, and he came on behind in the goddess's ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And she sat down facing him, and her women put ambrosia and nectar in front of *...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But if you knew, in your own mind, how much suffering it is laid down for you t...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And if one of the gods smashes me out there on the wine-dark sea, I will endure...", Untranslated paragraph: "A goddess has offered a man immortality and eternal youth on the most beautiful ...", Untranslated paragraph: "But look at the *reasons*, because this is where people go wrong with this scene...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is the whole of it. Not a philosophy — an appetite. He is hungry for a part...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is not courage in the way a young man understands courage. It is the thing ...", Untranslated paragraph: "The sun went down and darkness came on, and the two of them went into the innerm...", Untranslated paragraph: "I will not smooth that line out and I will not pretend it is simple. Four paragr...", Untranslated paragraph: "Four books we have been hearing about him. He is the cleverest man alive; he tho...", Untranslated paragraph: "He put on the clothes she gave him. She gave him a great axe, bronze, sharpened ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he started cutting. It went quickly. He brought down twenty trees and trimme...", Untranslated paragraph: "He made the floor of it as broad as a man who knows the trade lays out the botto...", Untranslated paragraph: "The first is that the audience did not skip it. These were island people. A very...", Untranslated paragraph: "She bathed him and dressed him in sweet-smelling clothes, and put aboard a skin ...", Untranslated paragraph: "He watched the Pleiades (star constellation), and Boötes going down late, and th...", Untranslated paragraph: "He was a long way off, in the mountains of the Solymi, and he saw him — saw him ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Well. So the gods have changed their minds about Odysseus while I was away with...", Untranslated paragraph: "I want to be sure the timing has registered, because the poem has arranged it wi...", Untranslated paragraph: "He gathered the clouds together and took his trident in his hands and stirred up...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I am afraid the goddess told me nothing but the truth when she said I would hav...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Three times, four times over, luckier were the Greeks who died back there on th...", Untranslated paragraph: "And as he said it a great wave came down on him from above, terribly, driving, a...", Untranslated paragraph: "At last he came up, and spat the bitter brine out of his mouth, and it was runni...", Untranslated paragraph: "She was Cadmus's daughter, with the pretty ankles; and once she had been a morta...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Now do this. You do not look like a fool. Take those clothes off, and let the r...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Here. Take this veil, this immortal thing, and spread it under your chest, and ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Here is what I will do, and it seems the best plan. As long as the timbers hold...", Untranslated paragraph: "The way a strong wind hits a heap of dry chaff and scatters it every way at once...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the lord of the earthquake (Poseidon) saw him, and shook his head, and said:...", Untranslated paragraph: "She stopped the tracks of all the other winds and told them to fall off and go t...", Untranslated paragraph: "And it came to him the way it comes to children when their father's life begins ...", Untranslated paragraph: "But when he was as close in as a man's voice will carry, he heard the sea boomin...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Sharp rocks outside, and the surf howling round them, and the cliff going up sh...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And if I swim on further, looking for a beach that slopes, or a river mouth, I ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And while he was turning it over, a big wave carried him in at the rough shore. ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the way the pebbles come away stuck all over the suckers of a squid when it ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then and there the wretched man would have died before his time, if Athena had n...", Untranslated paragraph: "And swimming, he came to the mouth of a river with a good current; and that seem...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Hear me, lord, whoever you are. I have come to you, as a man comes to what he h...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he came out with both his knees bent under him and his strong hands hanging,...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when he got his breath back and the spirit came together in him again, he un...", Untranslated paragraph: ""If I keep watch by the river through this miserable night, I am afraid the hard...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And if I climb the slope into the dark wood and lie down in the thick brush, an...", Untranslated paragraph: "And thinking it over, that seemed the better of the two; and he went up into the...", Untranslated paragraph: "He crawled in under a pair of bushes growing out of the same spot: one of them a...", Untranslated paragraph: "The way a man on a lonely farm, out at the edge of everything, with no neighbour...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **Tithonus.** Dawn's husband, and a joke the poem does not stop to make, t...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **Calypso, and what a nymph is.** Her name is built on the Greek verb *kal...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **The oath by the Styx.** The Styx is a river of the underworld, and swear...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **Steering by the Bear.** Greek sailing was mostly coastal and mostly in d...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^5]: **Ino, who is called Leucothea.** She had been a mortal woman: a princess ..."
B06                    135/135          5/  5               5/  5            14/ 14             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "They had lived once in a wide open country called Hyperia, next door to the Cycl...", Untranslated paragraph: "Hold on to that piece of family history for three books. These people are refuge...", Untranslated paragraph: "Athena went to the house, and into a richly-made room where a girl was sleeping ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the goddess went through like a breath of air and stood over the girl's head...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Your good clothes are lying about the place unwashed, and your marriage is very...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Go on — ask your father, first thing in the morning, for the mules and the wago...", Untranslated paragraph: "And she went away to Olympus, where they say the gods have their seat forever. T...", Untranslated paragraph: "She found her mother indoors, sitting at the hearth with her women round her, sp...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Daddy — could you get the wagon out for me? The high one, with the good wheels....", Untranslated paragraph: ""I do not grudge you the mules, child, and I do not grudge you anything else. Go...", Untranslated paragraph: "I would like to stop here for a moment, having just come out of the North Wind a...", Untranslated paragraph: "A girl has had a dream that has made her think about getting married, and she wa...", Untranslated paragraph: "There is a great deal of grand machinery in this poem — gods in council, storms ...", Untranslated paragraph: "The servants brought out the mule wagon and yoked the mules, and the girl carrie...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Nausicaa took the whip and the shining reins and cracked the whip to start t...", Untranslated paragraph: "They came to the beautiful stream of the river, where the washing pools were, al...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when they had washed everything and got all the dirt out, they spread it in ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then they bathed and rubbed themselves with the oil, and had their meal on the r...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when they had all had enough to eat, they threw off their headscarves and pl...", Untranslated paragraph: "The way Artemis (god of the hunt) who showers arrows goes down a mountain — down...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when she was about to yoke the mules and fold the good clothes and go home, ...", Untranslated paragraph: "He sat up and turned it over in his mind. *What now? Whose country am I in this ...", Untranslated paragraph: "The way a lion goes, bred in the mountains, sure of his own strength, driving on...", Untranslated paragraph: "The correct and binding way to beg a stranger for your life in this world was to...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he looked at her — a girl on a beach, on her own, ten feet from a naked stra...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And if you are one of the mortals who live on the earth, then three times bless...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Once, on Delos, beside the altar of Apollo, I saw a young palm shoot coming up ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Hard grief has come on me. Yesterday, on the twentieth day, I got out of the wi...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Pity me, my lady. You are the first person I have come to, after everything I h...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And may the gods give you everything your heart wants: a husband, and a house, ...", Untranslated paragraph: "The word is *homophrosynē*, and there is no clean English for it. Like-mindednes...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is the sentence to carry with you into the rest of this book. Everything Od...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I will show you the town, and tell you the name of the people. The Phaeacians h...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You surely do not think he is an enemy? There is no man alive, and never will b...", Untranslated paragraph: "They stopped, and called to each other, and settled him in a sheltered place as ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he washed the brine off his back and his broad shoulders, and scrubbed the c...", Untranslated paragraph: "They heard her and did as she said; and they put food and drink in front of him,...", Untranslated paragraph: "She folded the clothes and put them in the good wagon, and yoked the strong-hoof...", Untranslated paragraph: ""While we are going through the fields and the farmland, come along quickly behi...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But when we are about to enter the city — there is a high wall round it, and a ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""*Who is this tall handsome stranger with Nausicaa? Where did she pick him up? S...", Untranslated paragraph: ""That is what they would say, and it would be thrown at me afterwards. And I wou...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Sit down there and wait, for as long as it takes us to get into the city and re...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And when the house and the courtyard have closed round you, go quickly through ...", Untranslated paragraph: "The first is the practical brilliance of it, which is of a piece with everything...", Untranslated paragraph: "Not because she has changed her mind. Because there are men in her town who talk...", Untranslated paragraph: "She is a princess of a people who are the finest sailors in the world, at the ed...", Untranslated paragraph: "She cracked the whip and the mules went on, and stepped out well, and they made ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **The Phaeacians.** They are the hinge of the whole poem and it is worth k...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **The laundry.** Trampled in stone pits with the feet, rinsed, and spread ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **Suppliancy, and the touch he does not make.** To supplicate formally was...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **Like-mindedness (*homophrosynē*).** The poem's own definition of a good ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^5]: **"Go straight past my father."** The oddest instruction in the book, and ..."
B07                    108/108          5/  5               5/  5            16/ 16             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "And when she came to her father's famous house she pulled up at the gateway, and...", Untranslated paragraph: "Athena, who was looking after him, poured a thick mist round him as he went, in ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Certainly, sir," said Athena. "I will show you the house; my own father lives c...", Untranslated paragraph: "I hope you have noticed that this is not at all what the girl on the beach told ...", Untranslated paragraph: "She led the way, quickly, and he came along behind her in the goddess's own foot...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Poseidon began that line, with Periboea, who was the loveliest woman of her tim...", Untranslated paragraph: ""That is the honour she has, and has always had, from her own children, and from...", Untranslated paragraph: "And with that Athena went away over the barren sea, and left lovely Scheria behi...", Untranslated paragraph: "Now, at the end of the last book I pointed at Nausicaa's instruction — walk stra...", Untranslated paragraph: "What we are given is a family tree. A god fathered the line; the elder brother d...", Untranslated paragraph: "Notice what is missing from all of that. There is no office. She is not a priest...", Untranslated paragraph: "So we have been handed an answer with a hole in the middle of it, and the hole i...", Untranslated paragraph: "There is one other thing in that speech which slides past very fast, and I shall...", Untranslated paragraph: "Because there was a brightness like the sun and the moon over that high-roofed h...", Untranslated paragraph: "Inside, chairs stood along the wall on both sides, the whole way in from the thr...", Untranslated paragraph: "And there were fifty serving women in that house. Some of them grind the yellow ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And outside the courtyard gate there was an orchard of four acres, with a hedge ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Odysseus stood outside in the road and looked at it, and I should like to st...", Untranslated paragraph: "You will remember Menelaus's palace in Book Four, where this same young man's ow...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I would ask you to notice what the poem chooses to dwell on, at length and w...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is a fairy-tale, of course, and the poem knows quite well that it is a fair...", Untranslated paragraph: "And there is a man standing at the gate looking at it who has been at sea for te...", Untranslated paragraph: "Inside, the Phaeacian leaders were pouring the last of their wine to Hermes (the...", Untranslated paragraph: "And at that moment the miraculous mist fell away from him, and every person in t...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Arete, daughter of godlike Rhexenor. I come to your husband, and to your knees,...", Untranslated paragraph: "A man has appeared out of nothing in the middle of a closed room and taken hold ...", Untranslated paragraph: "What breaks the silence is an old man. Echeneus was the oldest Phaeacian present...", Untranslated paragraph: "And two things happen next which I would not like you to miss, because they are ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then a maid brought water in a beautiful golden jug and poured it out over a sil...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Alcinous told the herald to mix the bowl and serve everyone in the hall, so ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But if he is one of the immortals come down out of the sky," he added, "then th...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Whoever you know who carries the heaviest load of sorrow among human beings — I...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But let me eat, in spite of my grief. Because there is nothing more shameless t...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is one of the strangest and best speeches in the poem, and it is not heroic...", Untranslated paragraph: "Set it for a moment beside the other poem, because the two of them are arguing h...", Untranslated paragraph: "What this poem says, through the mouth of a man sitting in borrowed clothes at a...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he is not saying this lightly or as a joke. He says it with real bitterness ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the poem's judgement on him, offered quietly and without any fuss at all, is...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then they poured the last of the wine and went off home to bed, and Odysseus was...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Arete spoke first, because she had recognised the clothes. She had looked at...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Odysseus told her — and told her the truth, which is worth pausing on, becau...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And I saw your daughter's maids playing on the shore, and her among them, looki...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is the first lie we ever watch Odysseus tell. Not the first he has ever tol...", Untranslated paragraph: "And this first one is a lie told by a shipwrecked stranger with nothing in the w...", Untranslated paragraph: "He gains nothing whatever by it. It costs him a small risk, at the worst possibl...", Untranslated paragraph: "Keep that firmly in mind two hundred pages from now, when he is telling an enorm...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Stranger, my heart is not the kind that gets angry for no reason. Everything is...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Your escort I shall fix for tomorrow, so that you may know it is settled. You w...", Untranslated paragraph: "A king has just offered him a daughter, a house, an estate and a place among a p...", Untranslated paragraph: "There is nothing else to be said, and he knows it. He said the true thing yester...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then Arete told her women to put a bed under the covered walk, and to lay beauti...", Untranslated paragraph: "So the man who had endured everything slept there, in the corded bed, under the ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **Eurymedousa.** She was taken from a place called Apeira in the curved sh...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **Arete.** On the marriage: an uncle marrying his brother's orphaned daugh...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **The gold dogs and the gold torch-bearers.** These are not ornaments. The...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **The Spinners.** The Fates: three of them in the developed mythology, one...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^5]: **Euboea, and the size of the world.** Alcinous names Euboea as the furthe..."
B08                    116/116          4/  4               5/  5            11/ 11             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "Athena went through the town in the likeness of the king's own herald, stopping ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And she poured a supernatural grace over Odysseus's head and shoulders and made ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""So drag a black ship down to the bright sea, a new one on her first voyage, and...", Untranslated paragraph: "So the ship was hauled down and the mast stepped and the oars fitted into their ...", Untranslated paragraph: "He was given a silver-studded chair in the middle of the diners, backed against ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when they had all eaten and drunk as much as they wanted, the Muse stirred t...", Untranslated paragraph: "He sang about the quarrel of Odysseus and Achilles: how the two of them had once...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Odysseus took the great purple cloak in his strong hands and drew it down ov...", Untranslated paragraph: "Consider what has just happened, because as far as anybody can tell it had never...", Untranslated paragraph: "Alcinous, who was quick, said that they had all had enough of dinner and the lyr...", Untranslated paragraph: "Out they went, with a great crowd behind them, and a number of fine young men st...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when they had enjoyed the games, Laodamas said: "Friends, let us ask the str...", Untranslated paragraph: "So he went and stood in the middle and said, politely: "Come and try, sir, if yo...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Laodamas, why are you all pressing me and making fun of me? I have more grief i...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is not an insult about sport, and I hope you heard what it actually was. He...", Untranslated paragraph: ""That was ugly, sir, and you talk like a reckless man. The gods do not give ever...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You have stirred me up. I am not a beginner at games, whatever you say; I was a...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he got up, still in his cloak, and picked up a discus: a big one, bigger and...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Athena, in the shape of a man, set the marker down where it fell and called ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I am not bad with any of the usual weapons. I know how to handle a polished bow...", Untranslated paragraph: "Everybody went very quiet. And of all the things this man might have boasted abo...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But listen now, so that you can tell your own heroes about it later, when you a...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Come on then — the best dancers among the Phaeacians. Dance. So that the strang...", Untranslated paragraph: "So they cleared a dancing floor and widened the ring, and the boys who were best...", Untranslated paragraph: "He sang about Ares (god of war) and Aphrodite (goddess of love): how they first ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when Hephaestus heard the story that goes to the heart, he went off to his f...", Untranslated paragraph: "So the two of them went to bed and lay down — and the chains came down round the...", Untranslated paragraph: "And back came the great lame god, having turned round before he ever reached Lem...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Father Zeus, and the rest of you blessed immortals — come here and look at this...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Come and see where those two are sleeping — in my bed — and how it hurts me to ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the gods came crowding to the house with the bronze floor. Poseidon (god of ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the gods stood in the doorway, and unquenchable laughter went up among the b...", Untranslated paragraph: "Only Poseidon did not laugh. He kept asking Hephaestus to let Ares go, and in th...", Untranslated paragraph: "I hope you enjoyed it too, and I hope you also noticed what the Phaeacians did n...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then Halius and Laodamas danced on their own, because nobody could match those t...", Untranslated paragraph: "Alcinous was very pleased, and turned to the Phaeacians. "The stranger seems to ...", Untranslated paragraph: "They all agreed, and Euryalus did it, and did it well. He gave him a bronze swor...", Untranslated paragraph: "The sun went down, and the splendid gifts were carried up to the house, and Alci...", Untranslated paragraph: "You have not met her yet. He does not explain. He simply ties the knot, and the ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when the women had bathed him and rubbed him with oil and put a fine cloak a...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is the last we see of her. She does not weep, and she does not ask him to s...", Untranslated paragraph: "They were carving the meat and mixing the wine, and the herald came up leading D...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Give this to Demodocus, so that he can eat it; I want to say something civil to...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the herald carried it over and put it in the hands of the great man, and he ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Demodocus, I praise you above every mortal man. Either the Muse taught you or A...", Untranslated paragraph: ""So change to another part of it now, and sing about the making of the wooden ho...", Untranslated paragraph: "The singer began, and took it up from where the Greeks burned their huts and wen...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he sang how the sons of the Greeks poured out of the horse and sacked the ci...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the way a woman cries, falling on the body of her own husband, who has gone ...", Untranslated paragraph: "The poem has just compared him to a woman being dragged away from her husband's ...", Untranslated paragraph: "I have read a good many attempts to soften that and I do not believe any of them...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Let Demodocus put the lyre down. Not everybody here is enjoying this. Ever sinc...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And tell me your country and your people and your city, so that the ships can c...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Though I did hear my father Nausithous say, once, that Poseidon was angry with ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But come — where have you been driven to? What countries did you reach, what pe...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And tell me why you cry. Why does your heart go, inside you, when you hear abou...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **The songs we have lost, and what a bard actually was.** Demodocus sings ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **The Phaeacian athletes' names.** Read them again. Acroneus is roughly To...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **The fine for adultery.** There is law in the joke, and the law is the po...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **The prophecy hanging over the Phaeacians.** Alcinous mentions it in pass..."
B09                    139/139          5/  5               5/  5            19/ 19             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "He is about to say his own name aloud for the first time in this poem, and then ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Lord Alcinous, most distinguished of all your people — it is a fine thing to lis...", Untranslated paragraph: "I live in Ithaca, where you can see for miles. There is a mountain on it, Nerito...", Untranslated paragraph: "The wind carried me from Troy to the Cicones, at Ismarus. I sacked the town and ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then I told my men to run for it, quickly. The fools would not listen. There was...", Untranslated paragraph: "And meanwhile the Cicones went and called the other Cicones, their neighbours in...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is the first adventure, and it is the one most people have never heard of, ...", Untranslated paragraph: "The other thing in it is the shape of the disaster, which you will meet again: h...", Untranslated paragraph: "Zeus who gathers the clouds set the North Wind on us, an enormous storm, and cov...", Untranslated paragraph: "On the third morning we stepped the masts and hoisted the white sails and sat st...", Untranslated paragraph: "For nine days after that I was carried over the fish-filled sea by ruinous winds...", Untranslated paragraph: "They went, and fell in with the Lotus-eaters. And the Lotus-eaters did not plan ...", Untranslated paragraph: "I brought them back to the ships crying, and I had to use force. I dragged them ...", Untranslated paragraph: "They put nothing in with their own hands and they plough nothing. They trust the...", Untranslated paragraph: "There is a wooded island lying across the mouth of their harbour — neither close...", Untranslated paragraph: "Because the Cyclopes have no ships with painted cheeks, and there are no shipwri...", Untranslated paragraph: "It is not a bad island at all. It would bear anything in season. There are soft ...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is where we sailed in. Some god guided us through a black night; there was ...", Untranslated paragraph: "That, if you will forgive me for pointing at it, is a colonist talking. Water su...", Untranslated paragraph: "When the dawn came up we walked round the island and admired it, and the nymphs ...", Untranslated paragraph: "So all day until sunset we sat and feasted on meat past counting and sweet wine....", Untranslated paragraph: "In the morning I called my men together. "The rest of you stay here, my trusty c...", Untranslated paragraph: "We rowed across, and it was not far, and right at the edge of the land we saw a ...", Untranslated paragraph: "I told the rest of my companions to stay and guard the ship, and I picked out th...", Untranslated paragraph: "We got to the cave quickly, and he was not in it; he was out pasturing his fat f...", Untranslated paragraph: "And straight away my men started begging me to take some of the cheeses and go —...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I would not listen to them. It would have been very much better if I had. Bu...", Untranslated paragraph: "So we lit a fire and made an offering, and helped ourselves to the cheeses and a...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then he sat down and milked the ewes and the bleating goats, all of it in order,...", Untranslated paragraph: ""We are Greeks. We are coming from Troy, and all sorts of winds over the great g...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You are a fool, stranger, or you have come a very long way, telling me to be af...", Untranslated paragraph: "He was testing me. He did not get anywhere; I know too much. And I answered him ...", Untranslated paragraph: "He did not answer me a word. He sprang up and put his hands on my companions, an...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when the Cyclops had filled his enormous belly with human meat and milk drun...", Untranslated paragraph: "When Dawn came up he lit his fire and milked his fine flocks, all of it in order...", Untranslated paragraph: "There was a great club of the Cyclops's lying beside a pen: green olive wood, wh...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I told the others to draw lots, to see which of them would have to take the ...", Untranslated paragraph: "He came back in the evening with his fine-fleeced flock, and this time he drove ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Cyclops — here. Have some wine, now you have eaten human meat, so that you know...", Untranslated paragraph: "He took it and drank it, and he was terribly pleased with the sweet drink, and a...", Untranslated paragraph: "So I handed him the flaming wine again. Three times I brought it and gave it to ...", Untranslated paragraph: "He went over backwards and lay with his thick neck bent to one side, and sleep t...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I drove the stake in under the deep ashes until it should get hot, and talke...", Untranslated paragraph: "The way a man bores a ship's timber with an auger, and the men below him keep it...", Untranslated paragraph: "He screamed horribly and the rock rang with it, and we bolted away in terror. An...", Untranslated paragraph: "They heard him and came from all directions and stood round the cave and asked h...", Untranslated paragraph: "And they answered him with words that went straight out of them and away. "Well,...", Untranslated paragraph: "The Cyclops, groaning and in agony, felt about with his hands and took the stone...", Untranslated paragraph: "And this is the plan that seemed best. There were rams there, well fed, thick in...", Untranslated paragraph: "When Dawn came up the males rushed out to pasture, and the females bleated round...", Untranslated paragraph: "The last of the whole flock to go out was the ram, weighed down with his own fle...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Ram, my old friend. Why are you going out of the cave last of the flock, like t...", Untranslated paragraph: ""If only you could feel with me, and had speech, and could tell me where he is d...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when we had got a little way from the cave and the yard, I got out from unde...", Untranslated paragraph: "That made him angrier still. He broke the top off a great hill and threw it, and...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when we were twice as far out as before, I started calling to the Cyclops ag...", Untranslated paragraph: "Everything up to it has been faultless. The false name worked so well that the n...", Untranslated paragraph: "He is never stupid, and he is not being stupid here. He is doing something the G...", Untranslated paragraph: ""So the old prophecies have come home. There was a prophet here, a good man and ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Come here, Odysseus, and let me give you guest-gifts, and let me urge the famou...", Untranslated paragraph: "And then the Cyclops picked up a much bigger stone and swung it and threw it wit...", Untranslated paragraph: "We came back to the island where the rest of the ships were lying together, and ...", Untranslated paragraph: "So all that day until sunset we sat and feasted on meat past counting and sweet ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **The name he finally gives.** Greek names carried their meanings on the s...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **What "lawless" means here.** The Greek word is *themis* and its plural: ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **Maron's wine, and how the Greeks drank.** One cup to twenty of water, an...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **"Nobody."** The most famous pun in European literature, and it does not ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^5]: **The curse, which is also the synopsis.** Count the terms of that prayer...."
B10                    129/129          5/  5               5/  5            18/ 18             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "We are still in the hall on Scheria, after supper, and the cups are still going ...", Untranslated paragraph: "He has twelve children in his palace: six daughters and six sons in the prime of...", Untranslated paragraph: "We came to their city and their fine house, and he gave me a month of hospitalit...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when I asked him for my road, he did not refuse me anything, and he got the ...", Untranslated paragraph: "*It is extraordinary how this man is loved and honoured by everybody, whatever c...", Untranslated paragraph: "And that was the plan that won, and they untied the bag, and all the winds burst...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I woke up, and turned it over in my faultless heart — whether to go over the...", Untranslated paragraph: "Everybody remembers that as the crew being greedy and stupid, so it is worth loo...", Untranslated paragraph: "He never told them. That is the whole of it, and you can hear it in what is miss...", Untranslated paragraph: "We went ashore and drew water, and my companions had a meal beside the fast ship...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I answered them with a sick heart. *My wretched companions ruined me — and a...", Untranslated paragraph: "We sailed on from there with our hearts full of trouble, and the men's spirits w...", Untranslated paragraph: "We came into a splendid harbour, with a sheer cliff running unbroken along both ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then I climbed a rugged lookout and stood there. There was no sign of work — no ...", Untranslated paragraph: "They went ashore and followed a smooth road, the one the wagons use to bring woo...", Untranslated paragraph: "They went in and found his wife inside — as big as a mountain top — and they loa...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he raised the cry through the town, and the powerful Laestrygonians heard it...", Untranslated paragraph: "And while they were killing the men inside the deep harbour, I drew the sharp sw...", Untranslated paragraph: "Five hundred and forty men, give or take, and eleven ships, gone in about a page...", Untranslated paragraph: "We sailed on, glad to be out from under our death, and grieving for the dear com...", Untranslated paragraph: "We brought the ship into a harbour that will hold a ship, and some god guided us...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I thought about going down to look into it; and what seemed best, thinking i...", Untranslated paragraph: "I hit him in the middle of the back as he came out, and the bronze spear went st...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I threw him down in front of the ship and roused my men, going up to each on...", Untranslated paragraph: "They did as I said at once. They uncovered their heads on the shore of the barre...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Listen to me, my companions, for all the bad things you have suffered. My frien...", Untranslated paragraph: "And their spirits broke in them, because they remembered what Antiphates the Lae...", Untranslated paragraph: "So I counted off my well-greaved companions into two parties and appointed a lea...", Untranslated paragraph: "In the glades they found the house of Circe, built of polished stone in a place ...", Untranslated paragraph: "They stood in the gateway of the goddess with the beautiful hair, and they could...", Untranslated paragraph: "So they called, and she came out and opened the shining doors and asked them in....", Untranslated paragraph: "She brought them in and sat them down on chairs and benches, and mixed them chee...", Untranslated paragraph: "And they had the heads and the voices and the bristles and the bodies of pigs. B...", Untranslated paragraph: "So there they were, shut in, and crying; and Circe threw down acorns and beech m...", Untranslated paragraph: "Eurylochus came straight back to the fast black ship to tell us about our compan...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I slung my silver-studded sword over my shoulder, the great bronze one, and ...", Untranslated paragraph: "So I went up from the ship and the sea. And when I was going through the sacred ...", Untranslated paragraph: "*But listen. I will get you out of it. Take this good herb and go to Circe's hou...", Untranslated paragraph: "*And when Circe strikes you with her long wand, then draw the sharp sword off yo...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the slayer of Argus (Hermes) gave me the herb, pulling it out of the ground,...", Untranslated paragraph: "I stood in her gateway and called; and she came out at once and opened the shini...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when she had given it to me and I had drunk it off — and it did not bewitch ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I drew the sharp sword off my thigh and went at her as though I meant to kil...", Untranslated paragraph: "*You must be Odysseus. You must be. The man of many turns, whom the god of the g...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Circe. How can you tell me to be gentle with you? You have turned my companions...", Untranslated paragraph: "I said in Book Five that this man does not believe good news and that it would k...", Untranslated paragraph: "While I was in her bed, four handmaids were working in the house — the ones who ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when the water boiled in the bright bronze she sat me in a bath and washed m...", Untranslated paragraph: "So Circe went out through the hall with her wand in her hand, and opened the doo...", Untranslated paragraph: "And they knew me, and every man of them took my hand. And a longing to weep came...", Untranslated paragraph: "She told me to go down to the ship and haul her out and stow the gear in the cav...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the way farmyard calves come round the herd of cows coming back to the yard ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I told them to haul the ship out and stow the gear, and then follow me to Ci...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Where are we going, you poor fools? Why are you so hungry for trouble that you ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when he said that I thought hard about drawing the long sword off my sturdy ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Meanwhile Circe had bathed the rest of my companions in her house and rubbed the...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the goddess came and stood beside me. *Son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Set it beside Ogygia. He was with Calypso seven years, which is a great deal lon...", Untranslated paragraph: "I shall ask the question once and then leave it alone: what exactly was he doing...", Untranslated paragraph: "And my proud heart was persuaded. So all that day until sunset we sat feasting; ...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Son of Laertes, Odysseus of the many devices. Do not stay in my house any longe...", Untranslated paragraph: "And my heart broke when I heard it. I sat there on the bed and cried, and I did ...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Do not give a thought to wanting a guide beside the ship. Set up the mast and s...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Then go close in, hero, and do exactly as I tell you. Dig a pit, about a forear...", Untranslated paragraph: "*And make a long prayer to the strengthless heads of the dead. Promise them that...", Untranslated paragraph: "*And when you have finished praying to the great crowds of the dead, then sacrif...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Then call your companions and tell them to flay the sheep that are lying there ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the Dawn came up on her golden throne while she was still speaking. And she ...", Untranslated paragraph: "There was one called Elpenor, the youngest of them, not very brave in a fight an...", Untranslated paragraph: "And their spirits broke in them when they heard it. They sat down where they wer...", Untranslated paragraph: "And while we were on our way down to the fast ship and the shore of the sea, gri...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **The house of Aeolus.** Six sons, six daughters, and the daughters marrie...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **"Where the paths of night and day are close together."** A herdsman driv...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **Moly.** Black root, milk-white flower, hard for mortals to dig — and the...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **What Circe threatens.** Hermes' warning is specific, and the Greek is bl...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^5]: **Elpenor.** The youngest man aboard, no good in a fight, not clever, drun..."
B11                    111/111          4/  4               5/  5            17/ 17             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "This is the middle — not roughly the middle, but the middle. Everything before t...", Untranslated paragraph: "We went down to the ship and dragged her into the bright water and put the mast ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And she came to the edge of deep-flowing Ocean, where the country and the city o...", Untranslated paragraph: "We ran the ship ashore and got the sheep out, and went along beside the stream o...", Untranslated paragraph: "And they came up out of the darkness underneath. Brides came, and unmarried boys...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I told my companions to flay the sheep and burn them and pray to the gods — ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he groaned and answered me. *Son of Laertes. An evil fate from some god did ...", Untranslated paragraph: "*And now I beg you by the ones left behind, who are not here — by your wife, and...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Son of Laertes. Why have you left the light of the sun, you unlucky man, and co...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Even so, you may still get home, though you will suffer for it — if you can hol...", Untranslated paragraph: "*But you will pay them out for their violence when you come. And when you have k...", Untranslated paragraph: "*My child. How did you come down here under the murky dark, and you alive? It is...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Mother — necessity brought me down to Hades, to consult the soul of Teiresias. ...", Untranslated paragraph: "*She is still in your halls, and her heart is steady, and she is enduring it. Th...", Untranslated paragraph: "*But your father stays out on the farm and does not come into the town at all. H...", Untranslated paragraph: "*And that is how I died too. It was not the sharp-eyed archer goddess who came a...", Untranslated paragraph: "*My child. Most unlucky of all men. Persephone is not deceiving you. This is sim...", Untranslated paragraph: "That last instruction is the thing to keep. She does not say *remember me*, or *...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then Persephone sent up the souls of the women, all of them the wives and daught...", Untranslated paragraph: "Tyro came, who fell in love with a river and was loved by Poseidon in the river'...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I saw the mother of Oedipus, the beautiful Epicaste, who did a monstrous thi...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Chloris came, and Leda who bore Castor and Polydeuces, whom the earth holds,...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I saw Phaedra, and Procris, and beautiful Ariadne, the daughter of Minos, wh...", Untranslated paragraph: "I could not tell you or name all of them, all the wives and daughters of heroes ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the whole room stayed silent, held in the spell of it, through the shadowy h...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Phaeacians. What do you make of this man — his looks, his size, and the balance...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the old lord Echeneus said: "Friends, our wise queen has not spoken wide of ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Alcinous said: "What she says will stand, as surely as I am alive and rule o...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Odysseus said: "Lord Alcinous. If you told me to stay here for a year, and w...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Alcinous said: "Odysseus — looking at you, we do not take you for a cheat or...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But tell me this. Did you see any of your godlike companions down there — men w...", Untranslated paragraph: "A king has just praised his guest for not being the sort of man who invents stor...", Untranslated paragraph: "Lord Alcinous — there is a time for many words and there is a time for sleep. Bu...", Untranslated paragraph: "When Persephone had scattered the souls of the women, there came the soul of Aga...", Untranslated paragraph: "*It was not Poseidon on the ships, and it was not enemies on dry land. Aegisthus...", Untranslated paragraph: "*So I died the most pitiful death. And round me my companions were slaughtered w...", Untranslated paragraph: "*And the most pitiful thing I heard was the voice of Cassandra, whom treacherous...", Untranslated paragraph: "*So there is nothing more terrible, nothing more shameless, than a woman who can...", Untranslated paragraph: "*So never be gentle to your own wife either. Do not tell her every plan you know...", Untranslated paragraph: "And then came the soul of Achilles, and of Patroclus, and of faultless Antilochu...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Achilles, son of Peleus — far the strongest of the Greeks. I came for Teiresias...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is Achilles, who was offered the choice in the older poem between a long qu...", Untranslated paragraph: "*But tell me about my son. Did he follow you to the war, to be a leader? And tel...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I told him about Neoptolemus: that I had brought him myself from Scyros; tha...", Untranslated paragraph: "The other souls of the dead and gone stood about grieving, and each one asked me...", Untranslated paragraph: "I wish I had never won a contest like that. For the sake of that armour the eart...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I spoke to him gently. *Ajax, son of faultless Telamon. Were you not going t...", Untranslated paragraph: "In a book whose entire machinery exists to make the dead speak, one man is addre...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I saw Minos, the son of Zeus, holding a golden staff, sitting and giving jud...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I saw Tantalus, in hard pain, standing in a pool with the water up against h...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I saw Sisyphus, in violent pain, wrestling a monstrous stone with both arms....", Untranslated paragraph: "And after him I saw the mighty Heracles — his phantom. He himself is among the i...", Untranslated paragraph: "He knew me the moment he saw me. *Son of Laertes. Are you dragging out a bad des...", Untranslated paragraph: "But I stayed there, in case some other one of the heroes who died long ago might...", Untranslated paragraph: "So I went back to the ship at once and told my men to get aboard and cast off th...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **The pit, the blood, and where this is.** Three things a modern reader ne...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **Oedipus, three hundred years before Sophocles.** Here is the whole story...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **What the three punishments have in common.** Tityos assaulted Leto. Tant...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **Heracles in two places at once.** He is standing in front of Odysseus wi..."
B12                    103/103          5/  5               5/  5            17/ 17             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "This is the last of the four books he tells himself, and it is the one where eve...", Untranslated paragraph: "When our ship had left the stream of Ocean and come to the wave of the wide sea,...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when Dawn came up I sent my companions to Circe's house to fetch the body of...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Circe knew perfectly well that we had come back from the house of Hades, and...", Untranslated paragraph: "*You reckless men. You have gone down alive into the house of Hades. You will be...", Untranslated paragraph: "And our proud hearts agreed to that. So all day until sunset we sat and feasted ...", Untranslated paragraph: "*You will come first to the Sirens, who bewitch every man who comes near them. W...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Drive past. And knead sweet wax and stop up your companions' ears, so that none...", Untranslated paragraph: "*On one side there are overhanging rocks, and the great wave of dark-eyed Amphit...", Untranslated paragraph: "*On the other side there are two cliffs. One of them reaches the wide sky with i...", Untranslated paragraph: "*And Scylla lives in it, yelping horribly. Her voice is no bigger than the voice...", Untranslated paragraph: "*The other cliff is lower — you will see; they are close together, and you could...", Untranslated paragraph: "*You obstinate man. So your mind is on fighting again, and on hard work. Will yo...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Then you will reach the island of Thrinacia. And there a great many cattle of H...", Untranslated paragraph: "Almost everybody arrives at the Sirens carrying the wrong picture, and it is not...", Untranslated paragraph: "Which means the hook is baited with precision for exactly one man's weakness, an...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Friends. It is not right that only one or two of us should know the prophecies ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And meanwhile the ship came quickly to the island of the Sirens, because a fair ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I took a great round cake of wax and cut it up small with the sharp bronze a...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Come here, famous Odysseus, great glory of the Greeks. Stop your ship, so that ...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is what they sang, in beautiful voices, and my heart wanted to listen. And ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when they had rowed past, and we could no longer hear the Sirens' voices or ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Odysseus could have stopped his own ears, of course. There was wax enough, and n...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the moment we had left that island behind, I saw smoke, and a great wave, an...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I went along the ship and stood over every man and heartened him with soft w...", Untranslated paragraph: "I did not say a word to them about Scylla — a trouble there was no dealing with ...", Untranslated paragraph: "So we sailed up the narrow strait, and we were crying: Scylla on one side, and o...", Untranslated paragraph: "I turned my eyes back to the fast ship, looking for my men, and I saw their feet...", Untranslated paragraph: "The way a fisherman on a jutting rock, with a long pole, throws his bait down as...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is the only place in the poem where somebody is told the exact price of a c...", Untranslated paragraph: "And they are not told. He says so, and gives his reason, and the reason is profe...", Untranslated paragraph: "So we got clear of the rocks and of Charybdis and of Scylla; and then we came to...", Untranslated paragraph: "*You are a hard man, Odysseus. There is more strength in you than in other men a...", Untranslated paragraph: "*It is out of the night that the hard winds come, the ones that break ships up. ...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is the best speech Eurylochus ever makes and nearly all of it is true. The ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And they swore it, exactly as I told them to. And we moored the well-built ship ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then in the third watch of the night Zeus got up a screaming wind and an extraor...", Untranslated paragraph: "And then the South Wind blew for a whole month, and no other wind came at all, e...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I went up the island to pray to the gods, hoping one of them would show me a...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Listen to me, my companions, for all the bad things you have suffered. Every ki...", Untranslated paragraph: "And all the rest of them agreed with him. And at once they drove off the best of...", Untranslated paragraph: "And at that moment the sweet sleep went off my eyelids, and I went down to the f...", Untranslated paragraph: "There is the pattern this poem has been assembling since the beach at Ismarus, c...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Father Zeus, and the rest of you blessed gods — take vengeance on the companion...", Untranslated paragraph: "*Sun — go on shining among the immortals and among mortal men on the grain-givin...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when I got down to the ship I rebuked them, going from one to another. And w...", Untranslated paragraph: "For six days my trusty companions feasted on the best of the Sun's cattle. And w...", Untranslated paragraph: "But when we had left that island behind, and no other land showed, nothing but s...", Untranslated paragraph: "She did not run for very long after that. The West Wind came at once, shrieking,...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Zeus thundered at the same moment and threw his bolt into the ship. And she ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I kept going up and down the ship until the sea tore the sides away from the...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then the West Wind stopped raging. And the South Wind came on quickly, bringing ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I sprang up towards the tall fig tree and got hold of it and hung on like a ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And I let go with my hands and feet and dropped, and came down with a crash in t...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he stops there, which is a very fine last line: not a flourish, not a summar...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **The Argo, and a poem that is not this one.** Circe drops the name of ano...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **The Sirens, and what they are not.** Homer never describes them: not the...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **How he knows what Zeus said.** This is one of my favourite lines in the ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **The cattle of the Sun, and a promise kept.** Turn back to the first page...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^5]: **Between Scylla and Charybdis.** The phrase has been in English for centu..."
B13                     86/ 86          5/  5               5/  5            14/ 14             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "I have the story back, and I should say at once that everything is about to chan...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Odysseus — since you have come to my house with its bronze floor and its high r...", Untranslated paragraph: "That pleased them all, and they went off home to bed. And when Dawn came up they...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then they went back to the house and made a feast, and Alcinous sacrificed an ox...", Untranslated paragraph: "But Odysseus kept turning his head towards the blazing sun, willing it to set, b...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Lord Alcinous, most distinguished of all your people. Pour your libations now a...", Untranslated paragraph: "They all approved. And Odysseus stood up and put his two-handled cup into Arete'...", Untranslated paragraph: "And with that he stepped over the threshold. Heralds went with him down to the f...", Untranslated paragraph: "They sat down in order at the oars and cast the cable off the pierced stone, and...", Untranslated paragraph: "The way four stallions harnessed abreast on a plain spring forward together unde...", Untranslated paragraph: "There is a harbour there belonging to Phorcys, the old man of the sea, in the co...", Untranslated paragraph: "They rowed in there, knowing the place from old days; and the ship ran up onto t...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Father Zeus. I shall not be honoured among the immortal gods any longer, when m...", Untranslated paragraph: ""What a thing to say, wide-ruling Earthshaker. The gods do not dishonour you at ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I would have done it long ago, exactly as you say — but I always hold back from...", Untranslated paragraph: "So Poseidon went to Scheria and waited there. And when the seafaring ship came i...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the Phaeacians stood talking to one another, and one would look at the man b...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Alcinous spoke among them. "This is the fulfilment of the old prophecy my fa...", Untranslated paragraph: "And they were frightened, and got the bulls ready. So they were praying to the l...", Untranslated paragraph: "The last we see of the kindest people in this book — who took a naked stranger o...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Odysseus woke up in his own country, and did not know it. He had been away a...", Untranslated paragraph: ""What is it now? Whose country have I come to this time? Are they violent and wi...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I wish it had stayed with the Phaeacians. I could have gone to some other great...", Untranslated paragraph: ""It seems the Phaeacian leaders were not so wise and just after all. They have t...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he counted the beautiful tripods and the cauldrons, and the gold, and the fi...", Untranslated paragraph: "Home at last, after twenty years, and the first thing he does on the soil of Ith...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Friend — since you are the first person I have met in this place — good day to ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You must be a fool, stranger, or you have come a very long way, if you are aski...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Yes — I heard of Ithaca even in Crete, out over the sea; and now I have come he...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And when I had killed him I went to a ship at once and begged the lordly Phoeni...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Come — let us not talk about it any more. The two of us know all about craft. Y...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And I have come here now to weave a plan with you, and to hide the goods the Ph...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Goddess, it is hard for a mortal man to know you when he meets you, however cle...", Untranslated paragraph: ""That is always the way your mind runs. And that is exactly why I cannot abandon...", Untranslated paragraph: "And she scattered the mist, and the land appeared. And Odysseus was glad, deligh...", Untranslated paragraph: "That exchange is the hinge of the whole second half, and it goes past very light...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Son of Laertes. Think how you are going to get your hands on those shameless me...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Well. So I was very nearly going to die in my own halls the way Agamemnon died,...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I shall be with you, certainly, and I shall not lose sight of you when we are a...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Come now — I shall make you unrecognisable to everybody. I shall shrivel the go...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And you go first of all to the swineherd, who looks after your pigs. He is loya...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Do not let him weigh on you. I sent him myself, and I went with him, so that he...", Untranslated paragraph: "And with that she touched him with her wand. She shrivelled the good skin on his...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **The cave with two doors.** A cave at the head of the harbour, sacred to ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **The sentence that is never finished.** The prophecy was planted in Book ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **The Cretan lies.** This is the first of several — he will tell four or f...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **Why Athena stayed away.** She gives her reason plainly, and it is worth ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^5]: **The beggar's kit, and a debt paid.** Note what she gives him: a staff, a..."
B14                    107/107          4/  4               5/  5            14/ 14             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "He went up from the harbour by a rough track, through wooded country and over th...", Untranslated paragraph: "He found him sitting in the doorway of his yard — a high yard, built in the open...", Untranslated paragraph: "The dogs saw Odysseus and came at him barking, and he sat down cunningly and let...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Old man, the dogs very nearly tore you to pieces, all in a moment, and you woul...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the good swineherd led him in and sat him down, throwing down a great heap o...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Stranger, it would not be right for me to turn away a stranger, not even one wo...", Untranslated paragraph: "He got up at once and pulled his belt tight round his tunic and went out to the ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Eat now, stranger — such as servants have. Sucking pigs. The suitors eat the fa...", Untranslated paragraph: ""The blessed gods do not love a cruel action. They honour justice, and the right...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But these men know something. They have heard the voice of some god about my ma...", Untranslated paragraph: ""His living was enormous. No lord had so much, not on the dark mainland and not ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Odysseus ate the meat and drank the wine, ravenously, and said nothing, sowing t...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Friend — who is this man who bought you with his own property? You say he was r...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Old man, no wanderer who came here with news of him would ever persuade his wif...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But by now the dogs and the swift birds will have torn the skin off his bones, ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Eumaeus keeps pigs. He is a slave; he says so himself in the second sentence he ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Notice what he does when a filthy old vagrant with a holed bag comes out of the ...", Untranslated paragraph: "The poem does not point at that. It does not need to; it simply puts the two hou...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Friend, since you deny it altogether and say he will never come back — well, I ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Let Zeus be my witness first of all, and this table of hospitality, and the hea...", Untranslated paragraph: ""We will let the oath alone. But I do wish Odysseus would come, as I want him to...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I will tell you all of it truly. I only wish the two of us had food and sweet w...", Untranslated paragraph: ""By birth I am from Crete, and my father was a rich man. He had a great many oth...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Ares and Athena gave me courage. Whenever I picked the best men for an ambush, ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Before the sons of the Greeks ever set foot in Troy, I had nine times been the ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And when Zeus arranged that hateful expedition which loosened the knees of so m...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he told the swineherd the whole of it: how nine ships were fitted out and th...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And Zeus put this into my mind — and I wish I had died in Egypt then and met my...", Untranslated paragraph: "He stayed there seven years, he said, and gathered a great deal of property amon...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I went with him, suspecting it, because I had no choice. And the ship ran befor...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And Zeus himself, though my heart was in agony, put the enormous mast of the da...", Untranslated paragraph: "That, if I may say so, is a masterpiece, and the reason I have let it run at thi...", Untranslated paragraph: "Look at the shape of it. A Cretan of good family; a wrong done at the division o...", Untranslated paragraph: "He told him the rest: that the king had entertained Odysseus on his way home and...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But he sent me off first, because a Thesprotian ship happened to be leaving for...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And in the evening they came in to the fields of Ithaca, and tied me up in the ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I know how it stands with my master's homecoming. He was hated by all the gods,...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And I keep to myself here with the pigs, and I do not go to the city, unless se...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But I have had no appetite for asking questions since an Aetolian took me in wi...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You have a very slow heart in your breast, if not even an oath brings you round...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Stranger — that would do wonders for my good name and my reputation among men, ...", Untranslated paragraph: "They came in with the pigs and penned them, and there was an enormous squealing ...", Untranslated paragraph: "He split the logs with the pitiless bronze, and they brought in a very fat boar ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the swineherd stood up to share it out, because he had a fine sense of what ...", Untranslated paragraph: "So they ate, and when they had finished, Mesaulius cleared the food away — a man...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Listen to me now, Eumaeus, and all the rest of you. I am going to make a boast ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""When we got to the city and the steep wall, we lay down in the thick brush amon...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Now all the others had cloaks and tunics and slept comfortably with their shoul...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Old man, that is a good story you have told, and there is not a word in it out ...", Untranslated paragraph: "He wants a blanket. He is a guest in a hut where there is exactly one spare cloa...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Eumaeus, who has already said out loud that men in need make up tales for a ...", Untranslated paragraph: "So Odysseus slept, and the young men slept beside him. But the swineherd did not...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **A swineherd who curses Helen.** It is worth registering how far the war ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **"And you said to him, Eumaeus."** Several times in the next few books th...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **The Cretan tales.** This is the longest of them and the best place to wa...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^4]: **Seven portions, and the chine.** Watch the swineherd carve, because the ..."
B15                     94/ 94          3/  3               5/  5            12/ 12             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "She found him and Peisistratus lying in the porch of the house of Menelaus. Nest...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You know how it is with a woman's heart: she wants to build up the house of the...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And there is another thing I want to tell you. The best of the suitors are lyin...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Keep your ship well away from the islands and sail through the night. Whichever...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Telemachus, however much we want to go, there is no driving through a dark nigh...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But wait until I bring the gifts out and set them in the chariot, and until I t...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is a small speech and I like it very much. Everything in this poem turns on...", Untranslated paragraph: "Menelaus went down to the treasure chamber with Helen and his son Megapenthes, a...", Untranslated paragraph: "They poured the last of the wine and got into the chariot and drove out through ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Listen to me. I shall prophesy, as the immortals put it in my heart and as I be...", Untranslated paragraph: "She was extremely good at this in Book Four as well, when she looked at a boy wh...", Untranslated paragraph: "They came to Pherae and slept at the house of Diocles, and drove on next morning...", Untranslated paragraph: "Nestor's son turned it over and decided how to do it properly, and swung the hor...", Untranslated paragraph: "And as the crew were making ready, a stranger came up — a man from a long line o...", Untranslated paragraph: "They took his bronze spear and laid it along the deck, and he came aboard and sa...", Untranslated paragraph: "Meanwhile Odysseus and the swineherd were having their supper in the hut, and th...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Listen, Eumaeus, and all of you. In the morning I want to go into the town and ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Their servants are nothing like you. They are young men in fine cloaks and tuni...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But since you are keeping me here and telling me to wait for him — tell me abou...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Laertes is alive. But he prays to Zeus constantly that the life may waste out o...", Untranslated paragraph: ""While she was alive, sorry as she was, it was always a pleasure to me to ask af...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Now I go without all that. But the blessed gods make the work I stay at prosper...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Then you must have been a small child, Eumaeus, when you were brought so far fr...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Stranger, since you ask me that, listen quietly and enjoy yourself and sit and ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""There is an island called Syrie, if you have ever heard of it, above Ortygia, w...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And Phoenicians came there, men famous for their ships, greedy rogues, with a g...", Untranslated paragraph: ""*I come from Sidon, rich in bronze, and I am the daughter of Arybas, who was ve...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And the man said: *Would you like to come home with us, then, and see the high-...", Untranslated paragraph: ""So they all swore it. And when they had sworn and finished the oath, the woman ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And they stayed there a whole year and got a great deal of goods into their hol...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And she took me by the hand and led me out of the house. In the front hall she ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""The sun went down and all the ways grew dark, and we came quickly to the harbou...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And they threw her overboard, to be a meal for the seals and the fishes; and I ...", Untranslated paragraph: "The first is that this man is a king's son. He was born a prince on an island wi...", Untranslated paragraph: "The second is what he does with the story. Look at how he begins it: *these nigh...", Untranslated paragraph: "And meanwhile Telemachus and his crew were coming in to the shore. They furled t...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Take the ship on to the town now," said Telemachus. "I am going out to the fiel...", Untranslated paragraph: ""At any other time I would tell you to go to my own house; there is no lack of h...", Untranslated paragraph: "And as he said it a bird flew over on the right: a hawk, the swift messenger of ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he turned to Peiraeus, whom he trusted more than any of his crew, and asked ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then he went aboard and told the crew to embark and cast off the cables, and the...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Telemachus bound his good sandals under his feet and picked up his heavy spe...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **Theoclymenus, and the long pedigree.** The poem introduces this man by g...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **What Eumaeus was, and what he is.** He is the son of a king, stolen as a...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **Two birds, one book.** The poem frames this book with omens and it is do..."
B16                    117/117          2/  2               5/  5            13/ 13             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: "At first light, in the hut, Odysseus and the good swineherd lit a fire and got t...", Untranslated paragraph: "The swineherd jumped up in amazement, and the bowls he had been mixing the brigh...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You have come, Telemachus. Sweet light. I thought I should never see you again ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""So be it, old friend. I have come out here for your sake — to see you with my o...", Untranslated paragraph: "So Odysseus sat down again, and the swineherd heaped green brushwood for the you...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Eumaeus, that is a hard thing to say to me. How am I to take this stranger into...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But since this stranger has come to *your* house, I shall clothe him in a cloak...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But I will not have him go up there among the suitors. They are far too full of...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I wish I were as young as I am angry, and were the son of Odysseus, or Odysseus...", Untranslated paragraph: ""So the house is full of enemies. All the chief men of the islands — Dulichium, ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Shall I take the same message to Laertes as I go? The old man used to look afte...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Athena did not fail to notice that the swineherd had gone. She came up to th...", Untranslated paragraph: "Telemachus did not see her at all; the gods do not appear plainly to everybody. ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Son of Laertes. Speak to your son now and hide it no longer, so that the two of...", Untranslated paragraph: "And in both of them the longing to cry rose up, and they cried out loud, harder ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the light of the sun would have gone down on the two of them crying, if Tele...", Untranslated paragraph: "Every other recognition in this poem has a token attached: there will be a scar ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Which makes sense, when you think about it, because there is nothing available. ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Odysseus told him the truth: that the Phaeacians had brought him and put him ash...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Now tell me the number of them, so that I know how many there are and what sort...", Untranslated paragraph: ""The suitors are not ten, and not twice ten. They are a great many more than tha...", Untranslated paragraph: ""In the morning, go home and join that overbearing crowd. The swineherd will bri...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And I shall tell you something else; keep it in your mind. When Athena, who thi...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And when the suitors miss them and ask you, put them off with soft words. Say: ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And nobody is to know that Odysseus is in the house. Not Laertes, not the swine...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Father, I think you will find out what sort of spirit I have in due course; I a...", Untranslated paragraph: ""The women I do agree you should find out about — which of them dishonour you an...", Untranslated paragraph: "Meanwhile the ship that had brought Telemachus from Pylos came in to the town, a...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the herald and the good swineherd met, both of them carrying the same messag...", Untranslated paragraph: "Eurymachus spoke first. "Friends, this is a large thing that Telemachus has brou...", Untranslated paragraph: "He had not finished when Amphinomus turned in his place and saw a ship inside th...", Untranslated paragraph: "So the men from the ambush came up from the shore and went to the assembly, and ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""So the gods have got the man out of trouble. Day after day our lookouts sat on ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Come — before he calls the Greeks to assembly. Because I do not think he will b...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Let us get in first and take him out in the fields, well away from the town, or...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But if that does not please you, and you want him to live and keep everything h...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then Amphinomus stood up and spoke among them — the son of Nisus, and the leadin...", Untranslated paragraph: "Hold on to Amphinomus. He is the only one of the hundred and eight who is ever g...", Untranslated paragraph: "But Penelope had heard. The herald Medon had been standing outside the courtyard...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Do you not know that your own father came here as a fugitive, in terror of the ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Because I tell you this, and it will be brought to pass: his black blood would ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And in the evening the good swineherd came back to Odysseus and his son. They we...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I did not care to go about the city asking. My heart told me to give my message...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then they finished the work and laid out the meal and ate; and when they had had...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **A hundred and eight men.** This is the only place the poem does the arit...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **"Iron by itself draws a man on."** The excuse Telemachus is coached to g..."
B17                    127/127          3/  3               5/  5            11/ 11             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: ""Old friend, I am going to the city, so that my mother can see me. I do not thin...", Untranslated paragraph: ""My friend, I have no wish to be kept here either. It is better to beg one's din...", Untranslated paragraph: "Eurycleia saw him long before anybody else, as she was spreading fleeces over th...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Mother, do not stir up crying in me, and do not set my heart going in my breast...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Telemachus went out through the hall with his spear in his hand, and two swi...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Peiraeus, keep the gifts at your house for the moment. If the suitors kill me q...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he brought the stranger home; and there they bathed and oiled and dressed hi...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Telemachus, I shall go upstairs and lie down on that bed of mine which has beco...", Untranslated paragraph: "So he told her: how Nestor had received him kindly at Pylos, like a father recei...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Let Zeus be my witness first of all, and this table of hospitality, and the hea...", Untranslated paragraph: "Meanwhile the suitors were amusing themselves in front of the hall with the disc...", Untranslated paragraph: "And on the way, where the road runs by a spring — a fine built spring with cold ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""If you gave him to me to look after my farm, and sweep out the stalls, and carr...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Odysseus considered whether to go for him with the staff and take the life o...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Listen to the cunning dog talk. One day I shall take him off in a black ship we...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he left them going slowly along, and went on quickly and reached the house a...", Untranslated paragraph: "The two of them came up and stopped outside; and the sound of the hollow lyre ca...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Eumaeus, this must be the fine house of Odysseus. Anybody could pick it out of ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Argos. Odysseus's own dog, whom he had bred himself and never had the use of, be...", Untranslated paragraph: ""That is the dog of a man who died a long way off. If he were still in body and ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But now he is in a bad way. His master has died somewhere abroad, and the women...", Untranslated paragraph: "The first is that the dog is the first creature in Ithaca to know him. Not his s...", Untranslated paragraph: "The second is what Odysseus does about it. He looks away and wipes his face wher...", Untranslated paragraph: "Telemachus saw the swineherd first, and nodded to him and called him over; and E...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Telemachus took a whole loaf and as much meat as his two hands would hold, a...", Untranslated paragraph: "And when the singer had finished, the suitors made a noise through the hall; and...", Untranslated paragraph: "So he went from left to right, holding his hand out, exactly like a man who had ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Antinous, that is not well said, noble as you are. Who ever goes out and invite...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Give, friend. You do not seem to me the worst of the Greeks, but the best; you ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he told him the shape of it: the crews who would not be held, the plundering...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And they gave me to a friend of theirs to take to Cyprus. And from there I have...", Untranslated paragraph: ""What god has brought this nuisance here to spoil our dinner? Stand out there in...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Sit and eat quietly, stranger, or get out. Otherwise the young men will drag yo...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Antinous, you did wrong to hit that unlucky wanderer. You are a doomed man, if ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Penelope heard about it upstairs, and said, among her women: "May Apollo the fam...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Nurse, they are all hateful, because they plan wickedness. But Antinous is like...", Untranslated paragraph: ""My queen, I only wish the suitors would be quiet. He tells such tales as would ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""It is like watching a singer who has been taught by the gods to sing songs of l...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Go and call the stranger to me. Did you not hear my son sneeze at everything I ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Eumaeus, I should be glad to tell the whole truth to wise Penelope, because I k...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the swineherd went back with that, and Penelope was surprised he had not com...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then the swineherd went back to Telemachus and told him he was going out to the ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **Argos, and what Eumaeus says over him.** The dog's name simply means *sw...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **The stool, and the suitors' own unease.** Notice who objects. It is not ...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **The sneeze.** A sneeze at the moment a wish is spoken was a good omen, a..."
B18                    123/123          3/  3               5/  5            14/ 14             ⚠ english: Untranslated paragraph: ""Get away from the door, old man, before you get dragged out by the foot. Do you...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Do not push me too far with your hands, or you will make me angry; and old as I...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Listen to the tramp rattling away, like an old woman at the oven. I shall work ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Listen to me, suitors," said Antinous. "There are goats' paunches lying at the ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Friends, there is no possible way for an old man worn down with trouble to figh...", Untranslated paragraph: "They swore it. And Telemachus said: "Stranger, if your proud heart tells you to ...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then Odysseus pulled his rags up and belted them round his loins, and out came h...", Untranslated paragraph: "The suitors were extremely surprised, and one would look at the man beside him a...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Antinous rounded on him. "You braggart. Better if you had never been born, i...", Untranslated paragraph: "So when they had their hands up, Irus hit him on the right shoulder, and Odysseu...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Odysseus took him by the foot and dragged him out through the doorway into t...", Untranslated paragraph: "And they went in laughing and made him welcome. "May Zeus and the other gods giv...", Untranslated paragraph: "It is funny. A hall full of men roaring, a bragging beggar who cannot fight bein...", Untranslated paragraph: "And underneath it, look at what is actually happening. A man with nothing is bei...", Untranslated paragraph: "Irus is a bully and a fool and he picked the fight. He is also the only person i...", Untranslated paragraph: ""While the gods give him prosperity and his knees are quick, he thinks he will n...", Untranslated paragraph: ""And these are the sort of reckless things I see the suitors devising — wasting ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Amphinomus went off through the hall with his head down and his heart heavy,...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is the only warning Odysseus gives anybody in this poem, and it is a real o...", Untranslated paragraph: "She gave a little laugh, for no reason, and said: "Eurynome, my heart wants some...", Untranslated paragraph: ""All of that is well said, child. Go and speak to your son. But wash first, and ...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Eurynome, do not urge me to wash and oil myself out of kindness. The gods who h...", Untranslated paragraph: "And while the old woman was gone to call them, Athena thought of something else,...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the shining goddess gave her immortal gifts, so that the Greeks should marve...", Untranslated paragraph: ""That was a soft sleep that wrapped me round, miserable as I am. I wish pure Art...", Untranslated paragraph: "And she went down from her bright upper room, not alone; two women went with her...", Untranslated paragraph: "And their knees went weak where they stood, and their hearts were bewitched with...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Telemachus, your mind is no longer steady. When you were a child you had better...", Untranslated paragraph: ""All the same, I cannot manage everything sensibly. These men sit on either side...", Untranslated paragraph: ""I wish to heaven the suitors were sitting in our halls at this moment with thei...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then Eurymachus said: "Daughter of Icarius, sensible Penelope, if all the Greeks...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Eurymachus, the immortals destroyed my excellence and my beauty and my figure o...", Untranslated paragraph: ""When he was going he took me by the wrist of my right hand and said: *Wife, I d...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But here is what grieves me to the heart. This was never the way of suitors bef...", Untranslated paragraph: "So they all sent their heralds to fetch presents. Antinous's man brought a great...", Untranslated paragraph: "She comes down looking better than she has looked in twenty years, at a moment s...", Untranslated paragraph: "That is the marriage this whole poem has been walking towards, and here is the f...", Untranslated paragraph: "Then they turned to dancing and singing and enjoyed themselves and waited for th...", Untranslated paragraph: "And they set up three braziers in the hall to give light, and put dry firewood i...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Maids of Odysseus, of the master who has been away so long — go into the house ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And the women laughed and looked at one another. And Melantho abused him — a gir...", Untranslated paragraph: ""You miserable stranger, you must be out of your wits, if you will not go off an...", Untranslated paragraph: "And that frightened the women off. They fled through the hall with their knees s...", Untranslated paragraph: "But Athena would not let the arrogant suitors leave off their biting insults, so...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Listen to me, suitors of the glorious queen. It cannot be without a god's hand ...", Untranslated paragraph: "And then to Odysseus: "Stranger, would you be willing to work for hire, if I too...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Eurymachus, I only wish there could be a contest between the two of us in the s...", Untranslated paragraph: ""Or oxen to drive, the best there are, big tawny beasts, both of them well fed o...", Untranslated paragraph: ""But you are extremely insolent and your mind is hard, and you think you are a g...", Untranslated paragraph: "And he snatched up a footstool. And Odysseus sat down quickly at the knees of Am...", Untranslated paragraph: "The suitors made an uproar in the shadowy hall, and one would look at the man be...", Untranslated paragraph: "And Amphinomus said: "Friends, when a fair word has been spoken, nobody should t...", Untranslated paragraph: "That pleased them all. And when they had poured and drunk as much as they wanted...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^1]: **Irus, who is not called Irus.** His name is Arnaeus. *Irus* is a nicknam...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^2]: **King Echetus.** He is mentioned three times in this poem and nowhere els...", Untranslated paragraph: "[^3]: **Melantho, and what the poem tells you about her.** Four facts, in one se..."
B19                    153/153          4/  4               5/  6            18/ 18             ⚠ headers: 5→6
B20                    101/100          4/  4               5/  5            10/  9             ⚠ paras: 101→100; scenebrks: 10→9
B21                    124/123          4/  4               5/  5            14/ 13             ⚠ paras: 124→123; scenebrks: 14→13
B22                    141/141          4/  4               5/  5            17/ 17             ✓ 
B23                     50/ 49          5/  5               5/  5             5/  4             ⚠ paras: 50→49; scenebrks: 5→4
B24                     53/ 51          5/  5               5/  5             4/  2             ⚠ paras: 53→51; scenebrks: 4→2
VALIDATION SUMMARY: 22 chapters with issues, 26 total issues

=== Tests ===
 0 fail
 162 expect() calls
Ran 64 tests across 4 files. [52.00ms]
$ eslint .